=============
What is Open?
=============

This manual is about open data but what exactly is *open* data? For our
purposes open data is as defined by the `Open Definition`_:

*Open data is data that can be freely used, reused and redistributed by
anyone - subject only, at most, to the requirement to attribute and
sharealike.*

The `full Open Definition`_ gives precise details as to what this means 
but to summarize the most important:

-  **Availability and Access:** the data must be available as a whole
   and at no more than a reasonable reproduction cost, preferably
   downloading over the internet. The data must also be available in a
   convenient and modifiable form.
-  **Reuse and Redistribution:** the data must be provided under terms
   that permit reuse and redistribution including the intermixing with
   other datasets.
-  **Universal Participation:** everyone must be able to use, reuse
   redistribute - there should be no discrimination against fields of
   endeavour or against persons or groups. For example, ‘non-commercial’
   restrictions that would prevent ‘commercial’ use or restrictions of
   use for certain purposes (e.g. only in education) are not allowed.

If you’re wondering why it is so important to be clear about what open
means and why this definition is used there’s a simple answer:
**interoperability.**

Interoperability denotes the ability of diverse systems and
organizations to work together (inter-operate). In this case, it is the
ability to interoperate - or intermix - different datasets.

Interoperability is important because it allows for different components
to work together. This ability to componentize and to ‘plug together’
components is essential to building large, complex systems. Without
interoperability this becomes near impossible — as evidenced in the most
famous myth of the Tower of Babel where the (in)ability to communicate
(to interoperate) resulted in the complete breakdown of the
tower-building effort.

We face a similar situation with regard to data. The core of a “commons”
of data (or code) is that one piece of “open” material contained therein
can be freely intermixed with other “open” material. This
interoperability is absolutely key to realizing the main practical
benefits of “openness”: the dramatically enhanced ability to combine
different datasets together and thereby to develop more and better
products and services (these benefits are discussed in more detail in
the section on ‘why’ open data).

Providing a clear definition of openness ensures that when you get two
open datasets from two different sources you will be able to combine
them together, and it ensures we **avoid our own ‘tower of babel’: lots
of datasets but little or no ability to combine them together into the
larger systems where the real value lies.**

.. _`Open Definition`: http://opendefinition.org/
.. _`full Open Definition`: http://opendefinition.org/okd/
