Open Data Handbook
================

Introduction
------------

Welcome to the source text of the `Open Data Handbook`_. The handbook is 
a project of the `Open Knowledge Foundation`_.  If you are reading this 
it is likely you are looking to contribute in some way, whether that's 
translation, feedback, editing or adding more content. If you just want 
to read the handbook, then please head over to the 
http://opendatahandbook.org/.


Contributing
------------

We have several ways you can help. The project is split into a few 
roles. Our **authors** write content, **editors** merge those 
submissions into the handbook, **designers** help beautify it and 
**translators** bring the handbook to all countries of the world.

`Our wiki`_ is a great place to get started. It contains a large
number of tasks for people with `half an hour`_ as well as `larger
tasks`_. 

.. _our wiki: http://wiki.okfn.org/Projects/Open_Data_Handbook#Contributing
.. _half an hour: http://wiki.okfn.org/Projects/Open_Data_Handbook#Micro-tasks
.. _larger tasks: http://wiki.okfn.org/Projects/Open_Data_Handbook#Sections_that_need_authors


Resources
---------

:Home Page:     http://wiki.okfn.org/Projects/Open_Data_Handbook
:Mailing List:  http://lists.okfn.org/mailman/listinfo/open-data-manual
:Source:        https://github.org/okfn/opendatahandbook
:Translations:  https://www.transifex.net/projects/p/opendatahandbook/


About our tools
---------------

The handbook is written the `ReStructured Text`_ format. `ReStructured Text` 
allows us to write files in plain text files, which can be nicely rendered 
as a website or a PDF using `Sphinx`_.

.. _restructured text: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickref.html


Project Layout
--------------

Outline::

  opendatahandbook/
    source/
    bin/
    build/
    translation/

Details:

| ``opendatahandbook`` is the base directory.
|
|    ``source`` is where we keep the plain text source files.
|
|    ``bin`` is short for binaries, or executable commands. This folder holds handy scripts.
|
|    ``build`` is where rendered, or "built", HTML files live.  
|
|    ``translation`` is where our i18n files are kept


Rendering the handbook
--------------------

1. Move into the base directory of the project::

    cd opendatahandbook

3. Install `Sphinx`_, with a minimum version of 0.6. Instructions for 
   Debian and Ubuntu::

    apt-get install python-sphinx

4. Render the HTML, using ``make``::

    make html


Building for Translation (i18n)
-------------------------------

**Important**. You will need to install Sphinx >= v1.1 for this to work.

Generating pot files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Extract translateable sentences/paragraphs::

    make gettext

2. Add or update the ``translated/all.pot`` file as a resource on
   https://www.transifex.net/projects/p/opendatahandbook/.

Adding a new language
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We use transifex for this.

1. Go to https://www.transifex.net/projects/p/opendatahandbook/
2. Add translation for specified language (and a team)

Building a translation of the handbook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Download the translated all.pot file and copy it to (where ``lang`` 
   is a 2-digit `ISO code <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1>`_)::
   
    translation/{lang}/LC_MESSAGES/all.po

2. Build the mo file::

    make msgfmt lang={lang}

3. Symlink from all.mo (sphinx expects us to have kept with original  
   file names generated by gettext rather than concatenating)::

    make linkpot lang={lang}

4. Build the translation::

    make html lang={lang}

Updating the Translation with New Source Text
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Simple version: just upload a new all.pot to transifex.

WARNING: this will immediately update all translation files and will usually
discard any translations of strings that have changed however the trivial the
change is.


.. _Open Data Handbook: http://opendatahandbook.org/
.. _Open Knowledge Foundation: http://okfn.org/
.. _Sphinx: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/


Deploying the Handbook
----------------------

We use github pages to host the handbook at the present (in the past we have
used s3 and readthedocs).

As such the exact version of the html we want served should be in the gh-pages
branch of this repo.

The following as walkthrough of a deployment::

  # change gh-pages branch and get all latest changes to material
  git checkout gh-pages
  git merge master

  # build the relevant languages (if not already built)
  make html lang={your-lang}
  # copies build version to /{lang}/ so it is right location for website
  # also does some tidying up (delete files that are not needed)
  make github lang={your-lang}

  ## now you will want to commit changes
  # take a look at what has changed
  git status
  # add relevant files
  # e.g. add *all* changes for the lang you updated git add -u {lang}
  git add {relevant-files}
  git commit -m "[build][s]: build latest version of language ..."

  # push changes up
  # this will auto-update http://opendatahandbook.org/
  # up until this moment nothing will have changed on the website
  git push

